Alright, so let's have a discussion now about
sorting things. So we've seen that lists
have their own sort method which sorts
the list in place, but you may want to
sort other things besides lists. To do
that, you can use the sorted function.
So let's see some examples of how to use
that. So I'm gonna start off by creating a
new file - let's call it sorting.py.
Alright so the sorted function can be
used to sort any iterable object.
Now we've only seen two iterable objects so
far; strings and lists. So I'm going to
start with a string here. So we're going
to type pangram is equal to, in double
quotes, The quick brown fox jumps over
the lazy dog. A pangram is a phrase that
contains all the letters of an alphabet,
at least once. So an easy way to check
one is to sort it, so let's do that. So on
line three, I'm going to type letter
equals sorted, and in parentheses, pangram. Let's then print that out on line four
with print parentheses letter. Well
actually to be more consistent we should
have made that letters, because it's
actually more than one isn't it.
Alright.
Alright so let's run the program, and
notice that it produced a list. Python
sorted function will take any iterable
but will always return a list, and the
list is in alphabetical order. So you can
see that it started there with eight spaces, and then the letters, as I scroll over,
a right through and including z on
the end.
Now uppercase letters sort before
lowercase, and that's why we've got the
capital T before any of the other
letters - if I go back, we can see that
back there, to the left hand side. And
I'll come back to that point shortly.
Also you probably noticed that some
letters are duplicated. It's not possible
to produce an English pangram where each
letter only appears once, not without
using abbreviations or loan words from
other languages.
So in this case, e is repeated three
times, h is repeated twice, and also o is
repeated four times. It has also two
letter r's, and two u's as well.
Each letter does appear at least once,
though, and that's much easier to check
when the list is sorted. So that's the
sorted function - you give it an interable
and it returns a list containing all the
items in order. Now we can also sort
numbers. Let's have a go at doing that. So
on line six I'm going to type numbers
equals, left and right square brackets, 2.3,
4.5, 8.7, 3.1, 9.2,
and finish with 1.6,
and obviously we've got our
right square bracket. Then on the
next line, we'll type sorted underscore
numbers is equal to sorted parentheses
numbers. Then we'll print out the value,
print parentheses, oops,
sorted underscore numbers, like so. So if
we run the program now, we can see that the
list that's been outputted contains the
values in numerical order.
Once again, notice that we get a list
returned here, and the difference here
was this time we passed a list to the
sorted function, but got a different list
back. And that's an important point - we
get a different list back. And to confirm
that, if I go and add some code on
line nine to print numbers - the original
list. We run that - you can see that
numbers are still in the random order or,
in fact, the order that we typed it in
on line six. Now we're dealing with a
list here. That means we could have used
the sort method that lists have, and that
we've used previously. I'm mentioning
this because it's something that
students have found confusing. When
dealing with a list, what's the
difference between sort and sorted? Well
let's use the sort method to see. So I'm
going to just close the run window down
there, and we'll type on line eleven:
numbers dot sort parentheses, and on the
next line we'll print numbers,
in parentheses, so print parentheses
numbers
Alright so let's run that, and you can
see with that next line of output, the
sort method has sorted the list. We no
longer have the list in random order
because the sort method changes the list
that we call it on. In this case, because
we called numbers dot sort, the numbers
list is now sorted. Now when we pass
numbers to the sorted method, back up
here on line 7, the list wasn't altered.
Sorted, in fact, created a new list and
left the original one unchanged. So that
explains the difference in the way that
we call the two functions, on lines 7 and
11. On line 7, because sorted returns a
new list, we assigned its return value to
another variable: sorted underscore
numbers. On line 11, on the other hand, the
sort method sorts the list in place. That
means we don't assign the return value
to another variable. In fact, this is
something else that can be confusing -
assigning it to a variable doesn't give
it the result you might expect. So let's
do that to see. So on line 11, what I'm going
to do is type, at the start of that line,
another underscore sorted underscore
numbers is equal to numbers dot sort.
We're going to leave the print for print
numbers there on line 12 but on line
13 we're going to add print
parentheses another underscore sorted
underscore numbers. Now if you're using
IntelliJ, which I am, or PyCharm, you
may get a warning on line 11: function
sort doesn't return anything. If I hover
over that, you can see that, in fact,
we're getting that warning. And if we run
this now, you can see we get None printed
out as the last line of the output.
So you'll find that most of the methods
that modify an object in place, like sort
does, return None. If you expected another
underscore sorted underscore
numbers to contain a list, you'd be disappointed. More importantly, your code wouldn't work.
So there's very rarely, if ever, a need to
assign the result of a sort method to a
variable. Because you shouldn't do it and
I don't want to leave you with bad code,
I'm gonna put line 11 back to how it was
and delete line 13. I'm just going to
undo that, like so. Alright, so you can
also pass a literal to sorted. Remember
that you can use a literal value
wherever a variable can be used. Now if that
doesn't make sense, review the video on
expressions in section 3. So let's have a go
at doing that. On line 14 I'm going to
type missing underscore letter equals
sorted parenthesis, and in double quotes,
The quick brown fox jumped over the lazy
dog. We've got our double quote and right
parenthesis, and then on the next line,
print parenthesis and missing underscore
letter. Now if you run the program,
we get a list that contains all the
letters sorted alphabetically, and if we
scroll over, it's easy to see there, that
s is missing. The phrase isn't a pangram.
So on line three we passed a variable to
sorted. On line 14, on the other hand,
we passed a string literal. So you probably
already knew you could do that. I wanted
to review it in case it wasn't obvious.
We've covered a lot of stuff since
section three, after all. There's another
reason I want to add that code: it's very
easy to cause an error that can take
hours to figure out. Once you've done it
a couple of times, you tend to spot it
very quickly, thereafter. But that first
time it can have you tearing your hair
out, so I wanted to try and save your hair.
So looking at line seven, I call the
variable sorted underscore numbers. Now
that's a slightly long name and you may
have been tempted to call it sorted, so
let's see how that breaks things. So I'm
going to right click on sorted numbers
and use Refactor, Rename to rename it to sorted.
I click on refactor and that
changes it in both places, where it was
used previously on line seven and also
on line eight. Now if we run the program
at this point, suddenly we've got an
error. Now your IDE might be highlighting
a problem on line 14.
You can see in my case it says line 14,
and basically the error there, as you can
see, it says list object is not callable.
So the problem's actually caused on line
7, because we've rebound the name sorted
to a list. So it no longer refers to a built
in function - it now refers to our list.
When we tried to call the sorted
function on line 14, we're now trying to
treat a list like a function. So be aware
that Python lets you rebind, or reattach
names to new values, and that even
applies to the names of built-in
functions and classes. So now that you're
aware of it, you'll hopefully be spared
hours of frustration with code that
looks like it should work but doesn't.
So be very careful with your variable names.
Alright, so let's end the video here
and in the next one, we'll see how to
sort texts without worrying about upper
and lower case. See you in the next video.